Belief geometry lab: offline audit, 2026-09-12

Verdict
The cached experiment does not currently establish predictive contradiction
ability. Its implemented widening rule is weak even at predicting its geometric
proxy target, and semantic labels in the old classifier are not independent.
This does not disprove every possible geometry-based predictor.

Scope
No model calls, no model downloads, no production memory changes. Executed
original numerical functions via AST extraction and a pure numerical module
loaded directly, avoiding personal_agent's eager runtime imports. Source hashes
and cache hashes are in the JSON receipts. This is an offline diagnostic audit,
not the proposed fully held-out semantic-contradiction benchmark.

Data integrity
Inspected 1,750 embedding files. All 750 model-prefixed files match model-specific
raw filename, prompt, temperature, and row-count metadata. 749 cells have at
least five valid responses after error filtering. The other 1,000 flat caches
lack clear model attribution; only 150 match the current flat raw row counts.
They were excluded from scoring. Historical caches have no row-text hashes or
encoder-version manifest, so matching metadata is not proof of alignment.
9,929 repeated-text checks found no inconsistent embedding pairs in the
model-attributed subset. Flat raw files include 8,372 failed/empty generations
out of 13,816 records. Do not mix those with clean model-specific data.

Measurement failures
1. The exact original conversion maps both 30 identical vectors and 30
orthogonal vectors to confidence approximately 1.0. DBSCAN reports all of the
orthogonal vectors as noise, but the entropy calculation treats all noise as
one coherent cluster. Three clean cached cells also take the all-noise path.
Noise treated as individual unknown samples is a sensitivity control, NOT the
published semantic-entropy method and not a truth probability.

2. Of four historical GENUINE_SPLIT labels, three have an empty-response
cluster as their opposing representative. The fourth contrasts 'Gold.' with
'The symbol Au represents the element gold.' Representative-text inspection
finds no genuine contradiction in these four supposed positives. The old
classifier derives these labels from geometry, so using them to validate
geometry would be circular. This does not label every response in those cells.

3. On the same 749 attributed cells, removing failed/empty response vectors
reduces adaptive-DBSCAN multi-cluster cells from 161 to 141. Twenty apparent
splits disappear. Clustering is not, by itself, evidence of incompatible claims.

Predictive diagnostic
149 model/prompt groups have all five temperatures after filtering. To examine
new splits, exclude groups already multi-cluster at any temperature <=0.7.
91 remain, of which 16 split at T=1.0 or T=1.5 by the lab's adaptive DBSCAN rule.
The exact existing widening threshold produces TP=15, FP=59, FN=1, TN=16.
Precision: 20.3%; recall: 93.8%; false-positive rate: 78.7%.
AUROC on this geometric proxy: original covariance velocity 0.6333;
early cosine spread 0.6933; early cluster entropy 0.7317.
These are descriptive pooled results, not a significance claim; prompt families
recur across models, and no thresholds were tuned on this cohort. None of these
scores measure factual truth or independently labeled semantic contradiction.
The original predictor's trajectory at T=0.7 contains only T=0.0 and T=0.3
snapshots, excluding the current T=0.7 point. Receipt rows record these times.
Temperature is a sampling parameter, not elapsed time or incoming evidence.

Independent label review
fs_004: seven-continent statement versus empty output: missing output artifact.
fs_006: speed-of-light answer versus empty output: missing output artifact.
fs_009: 'Gold' versus 'Au represents gold': semantic equivalence.
fs_010: adult-skeleton answer versus empty output: missing output artifact.
Labels concern the SAVED REPRESENTATIVES, not an exhaustive human annotation
of their entire clusters. No contested medical/scientific truth adjudication
was needed to see that empty text is not an opposing proposition.

Recommended next research step
First correct error handling and noise treatment, and preserve model/encoder/
response hashes. Then create independent text-level labels, with incompatible
claims separated from paraphrases, compatible facts, abstentions, and errors.
Freeze that set before comparing geometry to simple disagreement and genuine
semantic entropy. A real forecasting claim additionally needs chronological
new-evidence sequences and evaluation using only observations available before
the outcome. Do not spend on model generation until those definitions are fixed.

Artifacts
summary.json: compact measurements and source hashes.
cache_provenance.json: every cache inspected and alignment checks.
cell_metrics.json: before/after invalid-output filtering.
geometric_proxy_rows.json: each prediction, label, and early feature value.
multicluster_text_witnesses.json: representatives from clean multi-cluster cells.
previous_positive_examples.json: historical supposed positives for inspection.

Reproduction
Use Python 3.13 with numpy, scipy, and scikit-learn (see requirements-audit.txt).
Run: python audit.py --repo /path/to/AI_round2 --output /path/to/new-results
The script never initializes a language model or embedding model.
