BALANCED CONTRADICTION LAB — 2026-09-12

Outcome
The downloaded MiniLM encoder loads and runs entirely offline. The balanced
lab completed. In this controlled test, the project's Fisher-distance component
did not add useful contradiction discrimination beyond cosine similarity.
This is evidence about the tested static representation and rules, not a
refutation of every geometry-based method or of the broader Aether project.

Design, frozen before scoring
72 constructed cases in 12 scenario families; 36 contradictions and 36 matched
noncontradictions. Six families (36 cases, 18 positive) develop thresholds and six
different families (36 cases, 18 positive) evaluate transfer. Families cover
counts, power, access, location, ownership, budgets, versions, locks, temperature,
schedules, and threshold comparisons. Whole families stay in one split.

Each side has three authored paraphrases. There are 432 row-preserving embeddings.
Positives include opposing exclusive values, explicit negations, and corrections
whose final asserted value conflicts with the source memory. Negatives include
paraphrases, a different entity, a different valid time, retractions that preserve
the source fact, and unasserted possibilities. The records are invented and
single-valued in the stated entity/time context, not factual claims about people.
Labels follow those constructions, include rationales, and were frozen before
embedding or scoring. One Codex author/reviewer; no independent human adjudication.

Primary experiment: continuous distance as contradiction evidence
Executed the repository's actual Fisher approximation, mean-only component and
covariance-only component from frozen source. Compared with centroid cosine,
mean cross-response cosine, and word/bigram TF-IDF cosine. TF-IDF vocabulary and
IDF were fit on development texts only. Higher distance was fixed in advance as
stronger evidence of contradiction, matching the research code's high-Fisher
candidate premise. Thresholds maximize development balanced accuracy; conservative
larger threshold wins ties. There is no heldout threshold optimization.

Heldout AUROC (36 cases; 0.5 represents chance ranking):
  Project Fisher distance:             0.238
  Fisher precision-weighted mean only: 0.235
  Fisher covariance shape only:        0.438
  Centroid cosine distance:            0.222
  Mean cross-response cosine distance: 0.256
  Word/bigram TF-IDF distance:          0.284

Fisher's threshold chosen on development (80.9571) caught 0 of 18 contradictions
and produced 4 false positives among 18 negatives. Centroid cosine caught 1 and
produced 5 false positives. These are calibrated distance rules, NOT the complete
production detector. Most development optimums defaulted to warning on nothing;
with the prespecified direction, separation already failed on development.

Below-chance AUROC means the direction of this relation is often reversed in these
controls. Contradictions can be lexically and semantically very close, whereas
harmless context changes increase distance. Simply negating the score would give
Fisher AUROC 0.762 and centroid cosine 0.778 on these same labels. This is a
post-hoc arithmetic diagnostic, NOT a newly validated classifier. It still gives
no Fisher advantage. Do not silently reverse the preregistered direction and
present it as a prospective result. The protocol was locally frozen, not formally
registered with an external study registry.

The paired, family-bootstrap 95% interval for Fisher-minus-centroid AUROC is
[-0.031, 0.065] (2,000 resamples, six heldout families). It includes zero. This is
a descriptive interval over a very small synthetic set, not population proof.

Concrete counterexample
Source: Event G's only scheduled day in week 12 is Monday.
Actual contradiction: Event G's only day that week is Thursday.
  Fisher distance = 63.929.
Harmless entity change: Event Z's only day that week is Thursday.
  Fisher distance = 110.974.
The changed event identity produces more distance than changing the day for the
same event. Raw geometry does not supply the semantic scoping rule needed here.

Supplement: execute the existing candidate gate
After the primary results, inspected and executed the unchanged function
find_cross_prompt_contradictions with its fixed defaults on these constructed
loci. It requires cosine similarity >= 0.7 and Fisher distance >= 5.0. This is a
source-grounded follow-up diagnostic, not part of the original frozen score plan.
No gate thresholds were tuned. Only its pure numerical dependencies were loaded;
the application's initializer and production databases were not used.

Heldout result:
  True positives: 18 / 18
  False positives: 17 / 18
  Precision: 51.4%
  Recall: 100%
  Balanced accuracy: 52.8%
The cosine >= 0.7 gate ALONE gives EXACTLY the same decisions. The Fisher >= 5
condition contributes no selectivity here. The candidate generator still needs
semantic adjudication; high candidate recall should not be labeled successful
contradiction detection. This test does not exercise the full application or its
temporal convergence predictor.

Reproducibility and verification
Encoder: sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2, local CPU float32, normalized.
Loaded only from the user-provided model directory. No model downloads and no
provider calls by the agent. Offline environment flags and a socket connection
block were active during encoding/scoring. Software dependencies were installed
into .venv-lab; those are runtime libraries, not additional model weights.
Max input length was 53 tokens, below the encoder limit; no text was truncated.

Saved embeddings have original record/text row hashes, raw and array file hashes,
encoder weights/config/tokenizer fingerprint, runtime versions, and encoding
settings. Disk save/load round-trip matched exactly. Raw input/protocol/source
locks are checked by the runner. All artifacts preserve row order.

19 checks passed: 14 existing measurement/cache regression tests plus five new
checks for balanced and disjoint splits, row mapping, family leakage, constant-
score chance performance, and threshold behavior. Real local encoder loading,
fingerprinting, encoding, and cache round-trip also completed successfully.

macOS created 37,073 AppleDouble ._ metadata files within the new virtualenv.
Transformers tried to parse some as Python and failed. Removed only files with
AppleDouble magic within .venv-lab; retry succeeded. Future package installs on
this external filesystem may recreate such metadata. No research/model data was
removed and no production application source was changed in this experiment.

Limitations and next decision
This is a single-author synthetic test with shared transformation templates across
scenario-family splits. Three correlated paraphrases per side give a noisy diagonal
variance estimate in 384 dimensions; these are not independent LLM draws or proof
of Gaussian internal beliefs. Default thresholds from other data may not transfer.
Only one small encoder and six heldout families were used. This tests static
semantic discrimination, NOT prediction before future evidence arrives.

These results do not justify investment in more geometry-only confidence or
contradiction claims. A useful next architecture would use geometry to retrieve
related claims and a separate semantic check for entity, valid time, negation,
conditional scope, and final asserted value. Evaluate that second stage on a new
heldout set, keeping candidate recall separate from final precision. Natural
examples and independent adjudication should precede broad research claims.

Run from the AI_round2 project directory:
  .venv-lab/bin/python artifacts/balanced-contradiction-lab-20260912/bundle/run.py \
    --repo "$PWD" --model "$PWD/models/all-MiniLM-L6-v2" \
    --output /private/tmp/aether-balanced-reproduction
  .venv-lab/bin/python artifacts/balanced-contradiction-lab-20260912/bundle/supplement.py \
    --results /private/tmp/aether-balanced-reproduction
  .venv-lab/bin/python artifacts/balanced-contradiction-lab-20260912/bundle/test_benchmark.py
The first command uses existing verified embeddings if present in the output,
otherwise it encodes with the existing local model. It cannot download a model.
